Add websocket tutorial (#1101)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/tutorials/ingest-real-time-websocket-data.md

# Ingest real-time financial websocket data
This tutorial shows you how to ingest real-time time-series data into
TimescaleDB using a websocket connection. The tutorial sets up a data pipeline to

> ingest real-time data from our data partner, [Twelve Data][twelve-data].

Reviewer: Logo mark is often different to the written mark (like Red Hat, which is always written as two words, even though there's no space between them in the logo). If you have an authority to ask, then we'll go with what they say, but otherwise I'd go with two words, just because that's what I see on their site.

> ingest real-time data from our data partner, [Twelve Data][twelve-data].

Author: Just got the answer from them, it's "Twelve Data"

{'event': 'heartbeat', 'status': 'ok'}
{'event': 'price', 'symbol': 'ETH/USD', 'currency_base': 'Ethereum', 'currency_quote': 'US Dollar', 'exchange': 'Huobi', 'type': 'Digital Currency', 'timestamp': 1652438899, 'price': 2089.07, 'bid': 2089.02, 'ask': 2089.03, 'day_volume': 193818}
{'event': 'price', 'symbol': 'BTC/USD', 'currency_base': 'Bitcoin', 'currency_quote': 'US Dollar', 'exchange': 'Coinbase Pro', 'type': 'Digital Currency', 'timestamp': 1652438900, 'price': 30346.0, 'bid': 30346.0, 'ask': 30346.0, 'day_volume': 49167}
```

Each price event gives you multiple data points about the given trading pair
such as the name of the exchange, and the current price. You can also
occasionally see `heartbeat` events in the response; these events signal
the health of the connection over time.

At this point the websocket connection works and data keeps flowing. You need
to implement the `on_event` function so data gets ingested into TimescaleDB.

## Ingesting websocket data into TimescaleDB
Now that the websocket connection is set up, you can use the `on_event` function
to ingest data into the database. 

> Usually, when you ingest data into a transactional database, ingesting a thousand 
> records in one transaction is faster than ingesting them in a thousand transactions.
> Because TimescaleDB is a transactional database, it creates a new transaction
> whenever you try to insert a new record. This means that it's better to insert 
> data records in a batch, so you can ingest multiple records in a single transaction.
> This approach means you can achieve higher ingest rates than if you were to
> insert data records one-by-one.
> 
> When you insert data in batches, as opposed to one record at a time, the
> database spends less time managing the connection, and transactions,  so
> ingestion becomes faster overall. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you ingest data into a transactional database like TimescaleDB, it is more efficient to
insert data in batches rather than inserting data row-by-row. Using one transaction to
insert multiple rows can significantly increase the overall ingest capacity and speed
of your TimescaleDB instance.
```

I felt like there was a lot of repetition here. If I've trimmed it down too much, feel free to modify a bit. But, don't say things like "usually" when, for all intents, it is true. We always suggest applications insert in batches. I literally can't think of a situation where it would be faster. It might be easier, but overall not faster.

### Batching in memory
A common practice to implement batching is to store new records in memory
first, then after the batch reaches a certain size, insert all the records
from memory into the database in one transaction. The perfect batch size isn't
universal, but you can experiment with different batch sizes
(for example, 100, 1000, 10000, and so on) and see which one fits your use case better.
Using batching is a fairly common pattern when ingesting data into TimescaleDB
from Kafka, Kinesis, or websocket connections.

> Now that you know you need to queue up your data before ingesting, let's see

Reviewer: Actually, let's get rid of the pronoun (see what I did there? 😉 )

```suggestion
Now you can see
```

# Ingest real-time financial websocket data

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This tutorial shows you how to ingest real-time time-series data into
TimescaleDB using a websocket connection. The tutorial sets up a data pipeline to
ingest real-time data from our data partner, [Twelve Data][twelve-data].
Twelve Data provides a number of different financial APIs, including stock,

> crypto, forex, ETFs, etc... It also supports websocket connections in case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
crypto, forex, ETFs, and more. It also supports websocket connections in case
```

you want to update your database frequently. With websockets, you need to
connect to the server, subscribe to symbols, and you can start receiving data
in real-time during market hours.

> Once you complete this tutorial, you'll have a data pipeline set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you complete this tutorial, you'll have a data pipeline set
```

up that ingests real-time financial data into your TimescaleDB instance.

> This tutorial uses Python and the
> API [wrapper library][twelve-wrapper] provided
> by Twelve Data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses Python and the API 
[wrapper library][twelve-wrapper] provided by Twelve Data.
```

## Prerequisites

> - A TimescaleDB instance running locally or on the cloud. For more information,
> [see installation options][install-ts]
> - Python 3
> - Sign up for [Twelve Data][twelve-signup] (there's a free tier!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you begin, make sure you have:

*  A TimescaleDB instance running locally or on the cloud. For more information,
   [see installation options][install-ts]
*  Installed Python 3
*  Signed up for [Twelve Data][twelve-signup]. The free tier is perfect for this tutorial.
```

## Set up a new Python environment

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Create a new Python virtual environment for this project and activate it. All

> the packages you need to complete for this tutorial will be installed in this environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the packages you need to complete for this tutorial are installed in this environment.
```

<procedure>

### Setting up a new Python environment

> 1. Create and activate a Python virtual environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create and activate a Python virtual environment:
```

    ```bash
    virtualenv env
    source env/bin/activate
    ``` 

> 1. Install the Twelve Data Python [wrapper library](https://github.com/twelvedata/twelvedata-python) with websocket support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the Twelve Data Python 
   [wrapper library](https://github.com/twelvedata/twelvedata-python) 
   with websocket support:
```

You can also make this a reference-style link.

    ```bash
    pip install twelvedata websocket-client
    ```

>     This library makes it easy to make requests to the API and maintain a stable websocket connection.

Reviewer: Move this sentence above the code block.

Author: https://github.com/timescale/docs/commit/deebb6d576eb352c8238cf8f346a97a6a14b9209

1. Install [Psycopg2][psycopg2] so that you can connect the
    TimescaleDB from your Python script:

    ```bash
    pip install psycopg2-binary
    ```

</procedure>

## Create the websocket connection
When you connect to the Twelve Data API through a websocket, you create a
persistent connection between your computer and the websocket server. This

> persistent connection can then be used to receive data as long as you or the
> server doesn't terminate the connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
persistent connection can then be used to receive data for as long as the
connection is maintained.
```

        	print(event) # prints out the data record (dictionary)
        ```
    
        This is where you want to implement the ingestion logic so whenever
        there's new data available you insert it into the database.
    * **`symbol`**

        This argument needs to be a list of stock ticker symbols (eg.: `MSFT`) or
        crypto trading pairs (eg.: `BTC/USD`). When using a websocket connection you
        always need to subscribe to the events you want to receive. You can do this
        by using the `symbols` argument shown above or if your connection is already
        created you can also use the `subscribe()` function to get data for additional
        symbols. Example of adding symbols after the connection is already created:
        ```python
        ws = td.websocket(symbols=["BTC/USD", "ETH/USD"], on_event=on_event)
        ws.connect()
        ws.keep_alive()
        ws.subscribe(["USDT/USD", "USDC/USD"])
        ```
    
    You can also notice there's a line in the code example to keep the connection
    alive *forever:*  `ws.keep_alive()`. It makes sure the connection will stay
    active until it gets terminated. If you don't add this line the connection

>     might break instantly.

Reviewer: Can we move this section before or after the procedure? There's a lot of concepts in here that don't really belong.

Author: https://github.com/timescale/docs/pull/1101/commits/847541b5633fe1936ff6a5f59473e1a162540fc6

1. Now run the Python script:
    ```bash
    python websocket_test.py
    ```
1. After running the script, you immediately get a response from the server 
    about the status of your connection:
    ```bash
    {'event': 'subscribe-status',
     'status': 'ok',
     'success': [
            {'symbol': 'BTC/USD', 'exchange': 'Coinbase Pro', 'mic_code': 'Coinbase Pro', 'country': '', 'type': 'Digital Currency'},
            {'symbol': 'ETH/USD', 'exchange': 'Huobi', 'mic_code': 'Huobi', 'country': '', 'type': 'Digital Currency'}
        ],
     'fails': None
    }
    ```

</procedure>

> Then, if you wait a few seconds you see actual data records printed out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have established a connection to the websocket server, 
wait a few seconds, and you can see actual data records, like this:
```

```bash
{'event': 'price', 'symbol': 'BTC/USD', 'currency_base': 'Bitcoin', 'currency_quote': 'US Dollar', 'exchange': 'Coinbase Pro', 'type': 'Digital Currency', 'timestamp': 1652438893, 'price': 30361.2, 'bid': 30361.2, 'ask': 30361.2, 'day_volume': 49153}
{'event': 'price', 'symbol': 'BTC/USD', 'currency_base': 'Bitcoin', 'currency_quote': 'US Dollar', 'exchange': 'Coinbase Pro', 'type': 'Digital Currency', 'timestamp': 1652438896, 'price': 30380.6, 'bid': 30380.6, 'ask': 30380.6, 'day_volume': 49157}
{'event': 'heartbeat', 'status': 'ok'}
{'event': 'price', 'symbol': 'ETH/USD', 'currency_base': 'Ethereum', 'currency_quote': 'US Dollar', 'exchange': 'Huobi', 'type': 'Digital Currency', 'timestamp': 1652438899, 'price': 2089.07, 'bid': 2089.02, 'ask': 2089.03, 'day_volume': 193818}
{'event': 'price', 'symbol': 'BTC/USD', 'currency_base': 'Bitcoin', 'currency_quote': 'US Dollar', 'exchange': 'Coinbase Pro', 'type': 'Digital Currency', 'timestamp': 1652438900, 'price': 30346.0, 'bid': 30346.0, 'ask': 30346.0, 'day_volume': 49167}
```

> Each price event gives you multiple data points about the given trading pair.
> For example, the name of the exchange, current price, etc... You will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each price event gives you multiple data points about the given trading pair
such as the name of the exchange, and the current price. You can also
```

> occasionally see `heartbeat` events in the response - these events signal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
occasionally see `heartbeat` events in the response; these events signal
```

the health of the connection over time.

At this point the websocket connection works and data keeps flowing. You need
to implement the `on_event` function so data gets ingested into TimescaleDB.

## Ingesting websocket data into TimescaleDB

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Now that the websocket connection is set up, implement the `on_event` function
> so data gets inserted into the database. When ingestin data into a
> transactional database, generally speaking, ingesting a thousand records in
> one transaction will be faster than ingesting them in a thousand transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the websocket connection is set up, you can use the `on_event` function
to ingest data into the database. 

Usually, when you ingest data into a transactional database, ingesting a thousand 
records in one transaction is faster than ingesting them in a thousand transactions.
```

> 
> TimescaleDB, being a transactional database, creates a new transaction
> whenever you try to insert a new record. Because of this behavior, it's suggested to
> insert data records in a batch - multiple records in one transaction.
> Using this approach you can achieve higher ingest rates than if you were to
> insert data record-by-record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because TimescaleDB is a transactional database, it creates a new transaction
whenever you try to insert a new record. This means that it's better to insert 
data records in a batch, so you can ingest multiple records in a single transaction.
This approach means you can achieve higher ingest rates than if you were to
insert data records one-by-one.
```

When you insert data in batches, as opposed to one record at a time, the

> database spends less time managing the connection, transactions, etc... and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database spends less time managing the connection, and transactions,  so
```

ingestion becomes faster overall. 

### Batching in memory

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

A common practice to implement batching is to store new records in memory
first, then after the batch reaches a certain size, insert all the records
from memory into the database in one transaction. The perfect batch size isn't
universal, but you can experiment with different batch sizes

> (eg.: 100, 1000, 10000 etc...) and see which one fits your use case better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(for example, 100, 1000, 10000, and so on) and see which one fits your use case better.
```

Using batching is a fairly common pattern when ingesting data into TimescaleDB
from Kafka, Kinesis, or websocket connections.

Now that you know you need to queue up your data before ingesting, let's see
how to implement a batching solution in Python with Psycopg2.

### Implement batching with Psycopg2

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Remember to implement the ingestion logic within the `on_event` function that
> you then pass over to the websocket object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember to implement the ingestion logic within the `on_event` function that
you can then pass over to the websocket object.
```

> Let's break down what this function needs to do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function needs to:
```

> 1. Check if the item is a data item (and not some websocket metadata)
> 2. Adjust the data so it fits the database schema (data types, order of columns)
> 3. Add it to the in-memory batch (a list in Python)
> 4. If the batch reaches a certain size, insert the data and reset/empty the list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check if the item is a data item, and not some websocket metadata.
1. Adjust the data so that it fits the database schema, including the data types, and order of columns.
1. Add it to the in-memory batch, which is a list in Python.
1. If the batch reaches a certain size, insert the data and reset or empty the list.
```

Here's the full implementation:

```python
from psycopg2.extras import execute_values
conn = psycopg2.connect(database="tsdb", 
                        host="host", 
                        user="tsdbadmin", 
                        password="passwd",
                        port="66666")
columns = ["time", "symbol", "price", "day_volume"]
current_batch = []
MAX_BATCH_SIZE = 100
def _on_event(self, event):
    if event["event"] == "price":
        # data record
        timestamp = datetime.utcfromtimestamp(event["timestamp"])
        data = (timestamp, event["symbol"], event["price"], event.get("day_volume"))

        # add new data record to batch
        current_batch.append(data)
            
        # ingest data if max batch size is reached then reset the batch
        if len(current_batch) == MAX_BATCH_SIZE:
            cursor = conn.cursor()
            sql = f"""
            INSERT INTO {DB_TABLE} ({','.join(columns)}) 
            VALUES %s;"""
            execute_values(cursor, sql, data)
            conn.commit()
            current_batch = []
```

> Make sure to use `execute_values()` or some other Psycopg2 function that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you use `execute_values()` or some other Psycopg2 function that
```

allows inserting multiple records in one transaction.

> After implementing the on_event function, your Python script can connect to
> the websocket server and ingest data real-time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you have implemented the `on_event` function, your Python script can connect to
the websocket server and ingest data in real time.
```

            if len(self.current_batch) == self.MAX_BATCH_SIZE:
                self._insert_values(self.current_batch)
                self.insert_counter += 1
                print(f"Batch insert #{self.insert_counter}")
                self.current_batch = []
    

    def start(self, symbols):
        """Connect to the web socket server and start streaming real-time data 
        into the database.

        Args:
            symbols (list of symbols): List of stock/crypto symbols
        """
        td = TDClient(apikey="50b7918b9ced4255816cfa42ee8eb40e")
        ws = td.websocket(on_event=self._on_event)
        ws.subscribe(symbols)
        ws.connect()
        ws.keep_alive()

conn = psycopg2.connect(database="tsdb", 
                        host="host", 
                        user="tsdbadmin", 
                        password="passwd",
                        port="66666")
    
symbols = ["BTC/USD", "ETH/USD", "MSFT", "AAPL"]
websocket = WebsocketPipeline(conn)
websocket.start(symbols=symbols)
```

Run the script:
```python
python websocket_test.py
```

You can even create separate Python scripts to start multiple websocket

> connections for different types of symbols (e.g.: one for stock, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connections for different types of symbols (for example, one for stock, and
```

another one for crypto prices)

If you see an error message similar to this:
```bash
2022-05-13 18:51:41,976 - ws-twelvedata - ERROR - TDWebSocket ERROR: Handshake status 200 OK
```
Then check that you use a proper API key received from Twelve Data.

> Continue with one of our complementing tutorials that show you how to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continue with one of our other tutorials that show you how to
```

> efficiently store, and analyze your data after ingestion:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
efficiently store and analyze your data after ingestion:
```

When you connect to the Twelve Data API through a websocket, you create a
persistent connection between your computer and the websocket server. This
persistent connection can then be used to receive data for as long as the
connection is maintained. You need to pass two arguments to create a
websocket object and establish connection.

### Websocket arguments

* **`on_event`**

>     This argument needs to be a function that gets invoked whenever there's a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This argument needs to be a function that is invoked whenever there's a
```

>     new data record is received from the websocket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    new data record is received from the websocket:
```

    ```python
    def on_event(event):
        print(event) # prints out the data record (dictionary)
    ```
    
    This is where you want to implement the ingestion logic so whenever
    there's new data available you insert it into the database.

> * **`symbols`**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* **`symbols`**
```

Need to double check that this works as expected in the rendered version.

>     This argument needs to be a list of stock ticker symbols (eg.: `MSFT`) or
>     crypto trading pairs (eg.: `BTC/USD`). When using a websocket connection you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This argument needs to be a list of stock ticker symbols (for example, `MSFT`) or
    crypto trading pairs (for example, `BTC/USD`). When using a websocket connection you
```

</procedure>

<highlight type="note">

> To keep the websocket connection alive *forever*, use the `keep_alive()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep the websocket connection alive forever, use the `keep_alive()`
```

Would "indefinitely" work better here?

Author: Actually yes
